# Long-tail networks aka Power Laws

Have you ever seen the map of routes that a major airline takes across a region ? Then you've seen a network map. A network map of air travel shows cities that are connected by a flight between them.

You can turn the picture of the network from a spatial one, to a chart called a histogram where the cities with the most routes (the hubs) are on the left, the cities are arranged in descending order, and the height of the bars represent the number of routes. For most networks, which are of the long-tail variety, there's a very typical falloff from most-to-least popular.

Airplane networks grow over time. One airline company starts out of Atlanta, runs a few regional routes over there. Then it gets a deal on some hangar space in Newark, NJ, and begins flights from there to New York City, and so forth. Usually you will learn that the Hub of a grown airplane network is one of its original cities, and that it has spawned a couple of more smaller hubs along its lifetime.

In a Sandi Metz talk, she prophetically mentioned that the largest file in any code base, is more often than not - the one defining the User. That is one of the first files added, it's the hub of the network, and it attracts new code like crazy. The chart of code files with their numbers of lines of code looks startlingly like the chart of cities and airline routes.

What do these networks have in common ? Primarily - how they grow.. Particularly, they grow via a process called "preferential attachment". This is not about liking mom or dad better, but naturally 'preferring' to connect new incoming pieces of the network to the larger, existing hubs. And it is a natural outcome of minimizing effort overall. Planes can only refuel at hubs, so unless a new city is within reach of a hub, that city will not be able to attach into the airline's network.

It's truly profound that large and small networks - as long as they grow by preferential attachment - will share similar proportionalities. And they go like this: If one city has 100 air routes, two cities will have about 50, 4 will have about 25, and so forth until a lot of cities are connected by only one route. The rate of falloff may change from one network to the next, but its the same shape regardless of airlines, or popularity of rented movies.

I'll refer you to the book Linked the New Science of Networks for more - the author has so many real-world examples and detailed mathematical models I won't try to reproduce them here.

The real insight is that there are natural laws that govern the growth of human-made connected systems just like naturally occurring connected systems. And so we must humbly admit that we too, are part of the Natural world. When I first read the Barabasi book, I needed to see for myself. I downloaded a months worth of my own cell-phone call data, and plotted them. Sure enough, there was one person I spent about 100 minutes a month talking to, 2 around 50 minutes, and so on down to several little 1-minute information checks to various numbers. Yours will look similar, I say with a large degree of confidence. The absolute number of minutes you talk will be different, but the shape of our networks is the same up to what's called a scaling factor. Like the talk of Growth Classes, our social networks have a shape class.

It's not the bell-shaped Normal Distribution either - you can forget about that one when describing growing networks. This shape has got a few hubs and far more spokes, not a highly occurring average and relatively few outliers. It's a Long-Tail. A Power-Law. Zipf's law states that the frequency of words occurring in a language (including this book) follow a Power Law. The popularity of open-source projects follow a power-law. Normal Distributions are fine for groupings with "central tendency". But for things which spread over time like languages, software, airline networks, and arguably stocks, the Power Law is the law we will, like Oedipus Rex, find ourselves following despite all attempts to the contrary.

As much as we are exercising our free will, we are part of an evolving system that follows rules in ways that minimize effort, and so we can't help but to follow. The good news is that somehow, being forced to navigate the constraints of the world in our various different ways, we end up choosing, in some ways, exactly alike.
